So welcome to Blueprint
Pure & Health Bars! In this video we will be using
BlueprintPure in C++ and giving ourselves a nice read only
function and also setting up these little blue health bars above our tank, so we know what state we're in. So see you in there!
OK, so to get these health bars going, let's start off
by going into the Tank Blueprint! We're going to need a new component on the Tank
Blueprint, so we want a Widget Component. Now they're saying that that's an
experimental component, recently added, but it should be fine. So
just add a Widget to the tank. And, for now, we'll just call it
Widget, actually, rather than calling it health bar, just to keep things separate, because
this is a component of the tank and it is a widget, but we're actually going
to want to make a Widget class for it, a Health
Bar Widget class. So it's a component inside a component, if you like. The Widget is a
component of the tank, and then, the health bar that we're going to make
will be a blueprint that we will specify in here, in this Widget class.
OK, so we have the Widget on the tank, that's not going to do anything,
right now. If we play the game it just does nothing, but we have it available
at least. Now let's go and make ourselves a new blueprint, I'm going to put it in the
UI folder, and I'm going to make a new blueprint of type Widget Blueprint
here, under the User Interface section. So there you go, I'm going to call it HealthBar.
And then, we have the starting point for our HealthBar. Let's go into
that HealthBar. Now it's actually going to be a very simple piece of UI. If you
look, you've got something here called a Progress Bar. Let's drop that Progress Bar
onto the Canvas Panel, so I'm dragging from Common, Progress Bar, dropping it onto the Canvas
Panel, and that puts me a Progress Bar component. Now remember
I said, whenever you drop UI Components down, the first you want to think about is your anchors, and in this case,
we want the Progress Bar to actually fill the canvas altogether. You'll see how
that pans out in a moment. So we pull the anchor point, the bottom-right anchor
point down to 100% like this. And that way this offset that
you see, under the Anchors, in the Details tab is
relative to the bottom-right anchor point. So you'll see if I grab
the actual bar, you see those numbers getting smaller. So that tells us, pretty much
straight away, that if we want to fill out the entire canvas with
the Progress Bar, so our entire UI is just a Progress Bar,
then we put a 0.0 Offset for Right and
Bottom. And there you go, the canvas is now full of health bar! Now we'll
worry about sizing and scaling it elsewhere, but that is pretty much it,
as far as the health bar is concerned, apart from, if you look down, we're going to need to
bind this Percent. We can do that now, and what
that's going to do is it's going to give us, under the Graph of the health
bar, it's going to give us a Get Percent. It's calling it underscore 0. I'm going to use F2
to just take off the underscore 0. And it's got a Get Percent function,
and what we're going to do is we're actually going to make a BlueprintPure, as
it happens, type of function, that is going to get us our health percent.
But in order to do that, we're going to need to be able to reference the tank, and we're a little bit away
from the tank, right now. If you think about where we are, the tank has a Widget on it. The
Widget is of Widget Class, HealthBar. Now we can
choose that, by the way now, back in the component of the tank. You can specify this
Health Bar, and then, if we browse with the magnifying glass, this is the Health Bar that we've
created. So we're two levels of indirection away from the tank itself, and we need to find a
way of actually finding the tank and writing a method on it,
that we can access here. So let's think about that! The first thing
is that we go back to the tank. The tank itself is going to do need to expose its health
percent. So what I'm going to do on a tank is, I'm going to take the constructor and pop it into the private
section, just because I want to keep the public interface tidy. I'm then going to make
myself a float, GetHealth
Percent. Percentage or percent? Let's just say Percent.
It doesn't actually need to take any parameters and it's going to return a percentage
health, and it's going to return a percentage health between 0 and
1. So we could say that "// Returns current health
as a percentage
of starting health, between
0 and 1". OK,
so let's make this thing a UFUNCTION. And I'm
going to introduce you to a new annotation. Now, I'll link this in the notes for you.
But there is something called a "blueprintpure",
and BlueprintPure is a bit like the Blueprint equivalent of
const in C++. It "does not effect the owning object in any way
and can be executed in a Blueprint or Level Blueprint graph."
In fact, we don't even need to worry about the execution flow nodes with BlueprintPure, as you'll
see, because it's not mutating or changing anything. So BlueprintPure allows us
to make this read only Pure
function, that we can be sure doesn't change anything. The Category,
I'm just going to say, equals "Health".
Alright, so it's pretty simple. We've got this float GetHealthPercent(), and, in fact, it should
be const as well, because we don't want GetHealthPercent to
be mutating any of the properties. So let's go and implement GetHealthPercent! I'm
going to do the quick thing, with VisualStudio.
Well I say quick, let's see if it's any quicker! I think it is a tiny bit quicker. And here
it is! Now, what are we going to return in GetHealthPercent? Well we've got two
values, we have a CurrentHealth and a StartingHealth. I just want to return the percentage of CurrentHealth over
StartingHealth. One way to do that with these floating points is like this, we can
put cast the CurrentHealth
to a float like that, and then, we can, while we're
doing the division, also cast the StartingHealth
to a float. So we're doing floating point division here, ensuring
that we are returning a floating point, because we've got a float over a float. Remember
that the current and the StartingHealth aren't floats, they're inte32's.
So these pretty sensibly get converted from a whole number into a
floating point number, then we do a floating point calculation and return the value.
So that is the GetHealthPercent method! Let's just compile up and make
sure that that is all at least compiling.
And we could if we wanted to, on the tank, test that GetHealthPercent, by going
to the Event Graph and going and finding the Tick() method.
And then, as soon as the compilation is finished, we should have the ability to GetHealthPercent,
but it won't be there until compiled.
So what we need to do is just grab a reference to ourselves, to the tank,...
...from
the tank reference. We should have the option for a
GetHealthPercent, and what we can do
every tick... And you see how this Get Health Percent doesn't have execution nodes.
You see it does not have the white nodes, because it can't change anything, it doesn't matter when this
happens, which is quite handy. That's a good sign, the more of that we can have in the blueprint the better.
It is the execution flow that goes alongside the data flow, so the execution
flow being the white stuff that makes things confusing. So then, we're
just going to need to turn this into a string and it seems
to be doing that straight for us. So we wire up every tick, we're going to print the Health
Percent of the tank. Let's just make sure that that works! So we're getting
hello hello hello, rather than a HealthPercent, and that's because I've wired it to the duration.
And I never compiled, so let's just convert this float into a string
and wire it in there.
OK, this is more sensible. Compile that, play it! Now we're
getting 1.0, 1.0. So that's the two tanks, me and the enemy tank both have a
health of 1.0, at the top-left of the viewport. You see my health has now gone down to
0.8 and 0.6 and so on, so that's working! That's brilliant! I'm
going to get rid of this test code, now that we know that that works, and that is just a simple
way of testing what you've done in Blueprint. OK
fine, so now the question comes, how do we get the reference to the
tank from the HealthBar. Well what we're going to need to do, over in the tank, is we're going to need to do a very similar
initialize to what we did before. So starting with this
Widget component, what I want you to do is to work
out how to come off this. Get the User Widget, so I'll help you
a little bit. Get the User Widget Object. You may have to cast or change the type,
and then, I want you to make a setter, a Blueprint setter, that is going
to set a variable that you'll specify over here on the HealthBar. So you're going to need to make
yourself a variable of type Tank over here on the HealthBar, so
that we can get a tank reference. We'll be able to drag it in from here. Make a variable of type
tank, and then, set that variable from here. If we come off here, we should be able to set
the variable, wire up the execution as appropriate, and then, we'll tidy
this up a little bit later. I know it's going to be messy but let's just see if you can do that.
OK wonderful! So let's get this going! Over on the HealthBar we're going to need a
variable for the tank, so I'm simply going to call it Tank or Owning
Tank. I just call it MyTank, I think, because it's
the tank that is relevant to this particular HealthBar. What type is it? Well it's of
type tank, so let's search that for that. There you go,
Tank! OK great! So now we have this My Tank
reference here, we can get it from my Tank.
If this was set, we'd be able to get the Health Percent
like so, and then, we can simply, all this HealthBar does
is that. It just goes, OK find my tank and
return me the Health Percent and set the UI
accordingly and then we'll worry about spacing and setting up the UI. But in the tank
the challenge that you had to do, of course, was to go and find that. So how are we going to do it? Well we get the User
Widget Object, like that, but we need to cast this to a HealthBar,
because, at the moment, it is just a generic widget object. Now it's a HealthBar! Let's
bring the execution flow in, and if the cast succeeds,
then from this we can set tank, Set
My Tank. Yeah, because that's the variable we just set over in
that HealthBar and the HealthBar has a My Tank variable, and at this node we're
in the context of the Health Bar. So this is how we go from
the tank to the HealthBar, the HealthBar finds out about it's
tank. Now I don't like this, because it's a different level of abstraction to these other things. This is saying
Initialize Tank Aiming, Initialize Tank Movement Component, and then, suddenly we're initializing
the HealthBar Widget. Well because that's what we're doing, why don't we highlight all these
nodes, right-click, and say Collapse to Function. You can do exactly the same in
Blueprint as you will in C++. So there you go, that's now
collapsed down. All we need to do is go and find it and rename
it to Initialize
HealthBarWidget.
OK, now that's much clearer, and we're operating at the same level of
abstraction. You can double-click into that, to see what it is. You can tidy it up all you like,
but the point is that this is now a consistent Event Graph hanging off
BeginPlay(). So "The property associated with My Tank
could not be found". So if you have any problems with this node saying
My Tank's not recognized, just ensure that your HealthBar is compiled and saved,
and then, remove it and re-add it. The other thing we can do is, we can break the
link from Cast Failed to the Return Node. We don't need to worry too much about handling
that cast failing, I don't think here, and then, we have a nice simple tidy
function in there. I'll just close and zoom in, so you can see the whole
thing. So we come in to Initialize HealthBar Widget, we find he Widget
component, we Get the User Widget, we cast it to our
HealthBar, and then, we set that Blueprint variable, which
we then pick up over in the HealthBar over here. So we're nearly there! What
we need to do with this HealthBar now is, we need to position it appropriately on the tank.
We have a tank, if we look at the viewport of the tank we can zoom out, and you'll see this guy
here. Look at the size and shape of it, it's massive! You can move it around and we can decide
where here now, physically, it appears. Now you'll only see it from one side,
so we're going to just see it from this side. Now, if we grab the Details
tab. This is the time, before we change it from World to Screen space,
which I'll explain in a minute, we decide how big it's going to be. Maybe 50 pixels wide
by maybe 10 pixels high. Pretty small but
there it is, and it sits above the tank. You can change the color, of course, if you wish. You can
go into the HealthBar itself, into the Designer, and you can come here
and just change that color, all you like. But see what happens as
the HealthBar progresses first. Once you've got it in the right place, you can
switch it from World space to Screen space. It will actually disappear but
once we play the game, after saving our Tank Blueprint... You see it there, that little
blue bar? Now let's see what happens! I'm going to hit the enemy tank, its health bar goes
down. Hopefully you can see that, I'll make the screen bigger. He hits me, my health bar goes down
and so on. OK, so we have working health bars after
all that! So I hope you managed to follow that, there's quite a lot of stuff going on there.
To recap what we did for you, we started off
by making ourselves a HealthBar component
on the tank. We just called it a Widget, we could now rename it Health Bar.
But you see there's two Health Bar's involved. This is Health Bar Widget component,
but it's of Widget Class Health Bar. Thats why I left the names the same until the end here.
We then made a HealthBar, which is literally just a Progress Bar, 100% of the canvas
for the Progress Bar. We then decided to
use the Progress... Now where is it on the Progress Bar? We
bound this GetPercent() method, which if you look in the graph over here
is here, and we used a BlueprintPure function on the tank,
called GetPercent. The question comes, how do you find the tank? How do you find the tank
that we're talking about? Well in the tank we, in the Event Graph, made
this simple Initialize Health Bar Widget, and unfortunately, it needs
to do a little bit of casting but this is what we ended up with. And we
went through and set that Blueprint variable here, back on the Health
Bar and we got the information through that we needed. So any problems with
following the code, just simply go over to GitHub as usual, Unreal Course,
find this lecture, or you can link from resources. I'll also put a link to this lecture in
the resources and you can look at the changes there. So I look
forward to seeing you in the next video!